The towns included New Boston, Clarksville,
Allen, Texas,
Woodway,
then studies for a number of independent
individuals not associated with some of the
cities, and then for the city of Lakeside and the
Fort Worth area, or Lake I'm sorry, Lake Worth
Village, which was at Lakeside. And for the Lake
Worth Independent School District planning
study, that's a school district located at the
north end of the approach into Carswell Air Force
Base. And so there was a certain amount of activity
I had through the north Texas area working on a
contractual basis for some of these towns. That
was under the old 701 planning program. Now, let's
go back to the education area, and let me just
comment a little bit. The Federation of North
Texas Area Universities consists of North Texas,
East Texas, and Texas Women's University, as I
already mentioned. The program there is focused
on merging together in terms of degrees and
hopefully course offerings, the delivery
system, the whole combination of things, a
unified, coordinated set of offerings in various
fields. Each field comes up before the
Coordinating Board for its own independent
approval. The graduate program in adult
continuing ed was approved in 1974, April 74, to
give authorization for the awarding of MA, MS,
MED, PhD, and EDDs at all three of the
institutions.
This was one of the programs. Typically, some
others included psychology. They've included
areas like early childhood studies. They have
included programs in, at one time, I believe, in
chemistry and so forth. Most of these have been
within the area of education, but not totally.
There are, for instance, some in vocational
technical training.
One of the things that we have striven for is to find
ways within our ACED committee to bring together
the scheduling of classes and getting
established common admission standards,
getting a common core of courses, course
descriptions that would be the same at all three
institutions. And of course, that means titles as
well. Getting examinations administered on a
three university basis, rather than each one
doing its own under some sort of local
departmental guideline. We are aware within this
group, in adult continuing ed, that we have quite
presently a diversity of orientations to the
handling of doctoral exams, ranging all the way
from three-day written exams to one-day written
exams. North Texas, for instance, has a half-day
proficiency exam in research tools. We at East
Texas rely on coursework to take care of those
research proficiency tool requirements. TWU has
a different set of criteria. They use core courses
for examination along the way before the student
ever gets admitted to doctoral exams. We are
attempting right now, and the adult continuing ed
committee is very active presently and during
this academic year of 85-86, with the support of
the graduate deans, with the support of the vice
presidents, with the support of the presidents of
the three institutions, to move forward on
unifying the entire approach. The nearest
program unifies its approach Maybe there are two.
Early childhood for one in terms of the
promotional aspects of the program and
psychology from the standpoint of the course
requirements and masters and doctoral
examination requirements.
Those are perhaps the hallmarks of those two
programs. early childhood, for example. I think
planners need to be thinking in these terms. That
program has brought in specialists in the early
childhood field. And the programs that they have
developed have been of interest to people from not
only all over North Texas, the East Texas area, but
generally across the state. And folks will come
in, even from Corpus Christi and other such
points, to hear these national and sometimes
internationally known figures speaking on
problems of early childhood. I see the same
potential application for the federation of the
graduate schools of planning bringing in people
of international stature because planners from
all over the state of Texas and beyond the
boundaries would be interested if those people
were going to be here for or in Austin or wherever
for a one-day seminar. It could be very, very
appealing, very attractive. And, in fact, early
childhood has made money on this, and they
consistently have a kitty of $2,000 to $5,000 that
they can use to promote their programs and to
guarantee honorariums and so on and travel
expenses and lodging and so on. And that's a very
good thing, I think, as a service to professionals
in the state And to my way of thinking, the planners
in the state would be very interested in hearing
individuals of international renown. This would
be non-state funds also. That's right. It's
non-state funds. So it's not subject to line item
vetoes either, or budget funds. You have complete
freedom on what you spend it on as well. Right. Now
the interesting thing is that our federation has a
certain amount of basic funding. And the
Federation, the Council of Presidents, as they
are called, in turn, on recommendations of the
graduate deans and the vice presidents, make
decisions as to where small amounts of money
should go to various programs. It may be $200 or
$500 or $700 or $800 for the year for a program
committee, such as Adult Continuing Ed. But early
childhood. has taken that money and they have spun
off these programs, which have become enormously
popular and successful. And as a matter of fact,
they turn around in some cases and even arrange for
students to enroll in one hour courses. Sometimes
these seminars will be five day, full time, five
day seminars. And students can even enroll for
credit or for continuing education units. And of
course, from the standpoint of a practicing
professional in the planting field, the CEUs
could be a way of encouraging them to come in. Well,
you know, the Educational Foundation is charged
with the educational function of the chapter. And
the only real activity that they've undertaken
continually is the short course for planning
commissioners and elected public officials. And
there's always been talk of
continuing education for degreed planners. And
this has never happened. Well, this would be a
place where
the institutions could, on a cooperative basis
with the Education Foundation, come together and
offer programs that would help the practicing
professional and others who are skilled, whether
they be in private practice or public practice.
Another thing that has always been talked about is
getting together a unit that could be used
throughout Texas in high school. usually we're
thinking lately about the junior year rather than
the senior year, and have this available with a
member of AICP to be there with the canned product,
as it were, that would be in some media form, and to
carry on a conversation and a discussion of it
Yeah, I think that should be done, especially
because the high schools have their career days
very regularly. There are lots of them here in the
Dallas-Fort Worth area. And it's a very popular
kind of event. I think planning needs to be very
much more concerned with recruiting high level.
entries into the profession. Let me comment on one
other aspect of that. And this is something that I
have touched on earlier. But I think that the
planning programs, in terms of the content of the
curriculum, but more especially in the working
arrangement, the programs need to be giving some
serious consideration to it. I have had
opportunity to observe both those programs that
are operated
within and at the level of a single department
program versus, on the other hand, those programs
that are operated in a coordinated fashion
embracing several departments. There are
weaknesses in the multidisciplinary approach
from the standpoint of program control and
management. Those, though, in my judgment, can be
overcome. And people in continuing education
have that same kind of problem. I didn't get rid of
those problems when I left. The planning field
actively moved over to education. But I must say,
candidly, I see some serious weaknesses in the
folks coming out of the graduate programs in
planning in being so singular in focus, whether it
be an urban design selectivity or an urban
analysis selectivity or whatever you might want
to name it, an administrative selectivity. that
they don't seem to have the inadequate
understanding of the total dimension of the
field. I don't mean expertise in all these areas.
But they don't seem to have a good, solid
understanding of the other side. They do get some
theoretical exposure, as I see it in most of these
programs, but some understanding of the working
tools in the other disciplines. For example,
and not challenging the program at A&M, but simply
pointing out by way of asking the question, do the
students in the graduate program at A&M get an
exposure to population statistics and the
analysis of demographic data from a statistical
point of view that a demographer will say, yes,
that person's on the right track. do they get that
same exposure to public administration case
analysis whereby the person who is a practicing
public administrator with a background in public
administration will be able to say, yes, that
person has correctly approached the analysis of
these case studies. That's the kind of thing I'm
talking about. Would the geographer, the
experienced qualified geographer, be able to
say, yes, the procedures that are being followed
in the analysis of the geographic implications
have been correctly addressed.
The theoretical base is important, but I think the
thing that I find so often missing is that the
student doesn't really appreciate exactly what
it is the person in the other field is expecting
from a performance standpoint. It's not the lack
of theoretical base, It's the understanding of
how the geographer should work in the situation.
There is professional methodologies. Yes, it's
the professional methodologies with kind of a
fundamental understanding of the underlying
theory, but not totally absorbed by the
underlying theory. Flabel Shurtleff, years ago,
when he was very active in AIP, gave a talk at Long
Beach, which I remember very well, sitting in a
room of about 35 or 40 people and listening to him
expound on the problems that he had done, kind of a
joint effort at MIT and Harvard, talking of . You
were in Long Beach. OK. In that Long Beach session.
He presented the results of a study that had been
done reaching across both academic and
practitioner lines, trying to identify courses
and content areas that individuals felt a
graduate program in planning should have under
the belt before going into private practice. And
he said, we eliminated not only the duplications,
but also those various areas that seemed to be
rather minuscule. And he said, we then put
semester hours or quarter hours credits on it,
added it all up. And he said, for a person who would
enter a graduate program in planning, say, at age
22 or 23, maybe with a couple of years experience
under the belt, maybe age 25 or 26, He said, we found
that the person would be 72 years old if they took
all the required courses. Beautiful. Beautiful,
yeah. I'm not surprised. Well, obviously, this is
a horrendous problem. I guess my plea is that the
people have some understanding of, as you put it,
the methodologies that give the planner
recognition by counterparts in the other fields
that they are connected with. It's not that they
know all of the nitty gritty details, but that
their methodological approaches sound. Because
that's the thing I have found consistently so
often. For instance, people coming out of urban
design programs, relatively little
understanding of how the geographer works, how
the sociologist works. Almost
no understanding of communication skills. And
this is terrible. Probably the greatest
weaknesses in that area. And certainly no
understanding of how final decisions are made.
No, no. The political process is just... Out to
lunch. Gone. Totally gone. And a lot of them
stumble and fall because of that. Or they get
frustrated with it. And there's no reason for
that. They need to recognize the process. Kent
kept homing in on process in his writings about how
you have to do this and this and this. And I think
it's a point that you have to be constantly aware
of. Planning is not something done in a vacuum.
It's got to be done with the people. How do you feel
that the three recognized schools should relate
to each other in Texas? My feeling would be that
they ought to put together a united front as a
consortium, a consortium of planning schools, or
I should use that instead of federation, because I
think it might make a stronger approach that One,
there would be first an acceptance of certain core
courses, especially that first year of graduate
study. And then second, that there would be,
because of the core, those core courses with
common agreement on substance, content,
description, would then be transferable from one
institution to the other. But beyond that, that
there would then also be agreement leadership
provided by all three schools in furnishing work
experience, on-site experience in various
locales in the state. And I don't care where it is.
That would be up to the institution and the student
needs. But I think beyond that, it would be very
helpful if in the final review of students,
probably the end of the third semester of their
graduate study, that there could be an evaluation
step, maybe near the end of that third semester or
just before they go into the fourth, an evaluation
step where faculty from all three institutions
would come together and review the work of all of
those third semester students and say, here are
the strengths, here are the weaknesses, this
student needs to get some special attention, not
necessarily another course. But in that fourth
semester, hone in on this particular area. Mike at
A&M, I recognize the need for some kind of review of
the student's work prior to the final oral exam.
Right. That's what I'm talking about. And so I
instituted the midpoint review. The midpoint
review is not intended as an exam, but as a review of
the student's work and to try to take a look at
anything that needed bolstering up during the
last half of his or her academic career, and also a
chance for the student to voice any aspirations
for the department, anything that might have been
hoped for that didn't come to fruition, wasn't
realized, that would help the department. And of
course, that's a very difficult thing for the
student to do, because they're still there and
they're still being graded. But I understand what
you're saying. But on the basis of a consortium of
three institutions that would make that a bit more
meaningful, I think it would from the standpoint
that these people are not going to continue to work
in College Station or Ryan. And therefore,
they're going to be competing with graduates from
the other institutions in San Antonio, in
Houston, in Corpus, Dallas, Fort Worth, and other
points. Also, it would make it very much more of a
professional type of review. Yes. And that's what
my concern is, that it not be an academic grading
process it not be the jury, but rather it be a
professional relationship between
individuals in the institutions almost
representing the role of prospective employers
and the students as prospective workers. And
therefore, bringing those two together in that
context so that the student would be able to say at
the end of the program, collectively, in the
wisdom of the faculty in the three institutions, I
have done what they said I needed to do in order to be
ready for the field. The only thing I would add to
this is that I think there must be somebody from a
practicing professional, maybe from a private
operation and someone from a public operation sit
in on that consortium review of those students. I
feel that's essential in order to be sure that
because of the mix of faculty maybe in that review
process, things don't get warped one way or
another and get out of context with what goes on in
practice. That's why we have a representative of
the graduate college on our PhD committee. Right.
Sure. just to ensure fairness. Right. This
reminds me of the relationship in planning
between Harvard and MIT, where one can take
courses at either institution for credit. Right.
And if they can do it, I can see no reason why we in our
own state under one coordinating board for higher
education couldn't accomplish it. Right. And I
think the coordinating board would be the vehicle
to accomplish a consortium. Yeah. To me, it's the
logical thing. It would mean that the deans of the
schools or the graduate deans, perhaps more
specifically, and the VPs and presidents could
really be the parent body. Well, I think it might be
very realistic to think in these terms right now
with the budget crunch. Yes. And you see, that's
what has happened with the adult continuing ed
program. And that is, although the budget crunch
hadn't surfaced as visible. It was 1 tenth of the
tip of the iceberg that was shown. But everybody
was aware that something could happen. We were
already under constraints in the three schools
about hiring additional people. Now we're at the
constraint of don't hire replacements. We were
really feeling, and I say this from the standpoint
of faculty and had felt for a number of years a
desire to get together, what we are now
finding is that we now have the attention of the
vice presidents and the presidents who are
saying, uh-oh, we better find a way to maximize the
capabilities of the faculties in these three
institutions. And mind you, we're only talking
about myself full time. and a part-time faculty
member at East Texas, one full-time person at TW
who will be leaving at the end of this year, and one
other full-time and a couple of part-time people
maybe doing one course per semester in the area,
and only one at North Texas. So we're talking only
about a very few faculty. Yeah. Paragraph. Mike,
would you care to comment on the Kessler
contribution to the planning of Fort Worth?
Interestingly, when I was there as planning
director, we dug out some of the old material from
the Kessler studies, the Kessler planning work.
I found very little, very little knowledge of
Kessler ever having done work in Fort Worth by the
man or woman on the street. That was unlike the
situation in El Paso, where I talked with a great
many people who remembered Kessler as a very
dynamic individual. He came in. He was involved.
He talked with local groups. In fact, I had people
tell me that they remembered 25 years earlier
having gone to a public meeting where Kessler
spoke. I never encountered that in Fort Worth. I
don't know why, whether I just didn't bump into the
right people, did not meet them, maybe they were
gone. Herman Cox, who was the chairman of the
Planning Commission when I went to Fort Worth, may
have had some contact with Kessler years before.
But seemingly, the impression was just very nil.
And we resuscitated part of his work for an exhibit
that we put on in Fort Worth. Where that material is
today, I do not know. We had also done a study. In
fact, a review of the Kessler material was
prompted in part because shortly after I went
there, we were doing a study on trying to find some
way to bring the four railroads together into
common terminal facilities and so on. It did not
meet with success. One of them, MoTak, turned
around deliberately and started to enlarge their
own facility so they wouldn't get trapped into
doing something with the Santa Fe.
At least that's my assessment of it. They expanded
in any case. Mike, this may take the record as the
longest interview. I'm afraid so. We covered a lot
of cities in the process and a lot of topics. And I
want to thank you for your time and your
contribution of the Texas chapter of APA. Quite
welcome. And this closes out the interview. If I
could ever do anything with the foundation, I'd be
glad to do it. And if there's anything on promotion
of the programs in the state for continuing into
the planners, I'd certainly be welcome. Look upon
that as a very welcome opportunity. Thank you.